Sequencing technologies continue to move in a direction where throughput per run is
increasing while the cost per basepair is decreasing (review in ). Several
technologies available on the market today produce massive volumes of sequence data per
run; for instance, Illumina's GAIIx system can produce over 50 Giga-base pair (Gbp) per
run, and it is expected that this volume will increase 4 fold with Illumina’s HiSeq 2000
technology. At the same time, the pricing of the technology has significantly dropped,
making the technology widely accessible to small laboratories. A new generation of
smaller-factor, benchtop-based, less expensive sequencers will be available in 2010 (for
example, GS Junior - 454 Sequencing, online ref. 1). Therefore, sequencing of complete
bacterial, small fungal and viral genomes, or multiple BACs and plasmids containing genic
regions of interest, will become commonplace for biological research.  Sequencing finds
applications in several areas of the genome sciences, including Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism (SNP) variation in genes, gene expression analysis (RNAseq), DNA–protein
interaction analysis (ChiPseq), and study of microbial communities from different
environments (review in Mardis 2008).  For instance, sequence comparison has been used to
identify SNPs in genes sequences obtained from cancer samples (Dahl et al. 2007), or
discovery of gene variants in sequenced HIV clinical samples (Wang et al. 2007). ChIP-seq
is a method based on sequencing fragments from DNA-protein complexes after chromatin
immuno-precipitation, and in combination with genome-wide sequence alignments it has been
successfully used for uncovering protein interactions in the entire human genome (Jothi et
al. 2008).  RNA-seq, uses high-throughput sequencing as a method for identifying all
transcripts present in the cell. Unlike designing microarrays for measuring gene
expression, it does not require an annotated genome or a priori knowledge of the
transcripts. It has been shown to be very accurate by identifying 86% of transcripts
present in yeast cells, compared to previously known expressed genes under similar
conditions (Yassour et al. 2009). When combined with whole genome sequencing and
large-scale sequence alignment of the identified transcripts to the genome, RNAseq can be
an efficient method for quickly annotating new genomes.  The new generation of sequencing
technologies is also being used in the area of metagenomics – a paradigm that offers
cultivation independent approaches to study microbial communities. With their high
throughput, these technologies offer greater sequencing depth (compared to traditional
Sanger sequencing) and thus provide the ability to sample genomes of organisms that occur
at low abundances in communities at much lower costs. While 454 pyrosequencing sequencing
is used routinely in metagenomic projects (see for instance, Angly et al. 2006, Edwards et
al. 2006, Turnbaugh et al. 2006), Illumina sequencing has also recently been shown to be
useful in studying microbial communities (Qin et al. 2010). The JCVI is involved in
several large-scale metagenomic projects, including the Sorcerer II Global Ocean Sampling
(GOS) Expedition to study marine microbial diversity, and also the National Institutes of
Health funded Human Microbiome Project to study human associated microbial communities.
When the GOS data from the first phase of the expedition were published (Yooseph et al.
2007), they more than doubled the number of proteins in the public databases. 

Sequencing instruments are typically bundled with only minimal computational and storage
capacity for data capture during sequencing runs. Given the scale of datasets, scientific
value cannot necessarily be obtained from the investment in a sequencing instrument,
unless it is accompanied by an equal investment in a large-scale bioinformatics
infrastructure. For example, the un-assembled reads returned from a single lane of the
Illumina GAIIx instrument after base calling are approximately 100 GigaByte (GB) in size.
However, publicly available online sequence analysis tools such as those available via the
NCBI website cannot accept input sequence data files of more than 0.5 GB.
